1.1  FONTLOG for Tengwar Formal
This file provides detailed information on the Tengwar Formal font software.
This information should be distributed along with the Tengwar Formal fonts and
any derivative works.

1.2  Basic Font Information

The Tengwar alphabet was originally designed by J.R.R Tolkien,
and the design was first published on paper in Appendix E in the
first edition of the "Lord of the Rings".

The Tengwar Formal Font was first made by Michał Nowakowski in 2002.
Its glyphs' forms are to resemble one of Tolkien's original
designs, namely the "formal bookhand" Tengwar style. Please do not
confuse this style with Latin "formal scripts".

The fonts are licensed under the SIL Open Font License, Version 1.1.
This license is provided in a separate file, LICENSE, supplied with
the fonts, and is also available with a FAQ at: http://scripts.sil.org/OFL

Tengwar Formal keyboard layout is almost identical to standard Tengwar
fonts keymapping by Dan Smith. Tengwar Formal A keyboard layout will
probably vary between versions, as it is still in development.
The details are described in the Keymapping.pdf file, included with
the fonts, and available as a standalone file at:
http://tengwarformal.limes.com.pl

The most important: any publications should use UTF-8 or other Unicode
encoding. This is the only working solution for problems mentioned below.

Please note that the keymapping was originally developed for Windows
- that is, Windows Latin encoding was used. This may cause some problems
on other operating systems, unless they are capable of using Unicode.
Unix users may notice lack of code points 128..159, as their ISO-8869-1
specifies them as control chars.

Users of old versions of Mac OS may suffer from wholly different keystrokes.
For them, I made last-resort ps1-mac and ttf-mac versions, re-engineered
so that they should, under certain conditions, work with similar keystrokes
and give correct look for text that was prepared for PC. Please note that
Unicode codes for tengwar are all different, so these re-engineered versions
are absolutely not portable and foreign documents (from the Internet or other
users) may (almost certainly will) look illegible.

1.3  ChangeLog

?? ??? 2010 (Johan Winge & J. "Mach" Wust) Tengwar Formal Unicode Version ????
- Converted to Unicode PUA, with smart rendering using Graphite and AAT.
- Added characters for open Anna, Vaiya, grave tehta, dot-inside tehta.
- Changed the glyph shapes of prefeanorian quesse, Lowdham HW.
- Added glyphs for OI tehtar ligature, UI tehtar ligature, lower nasal bar, smaller following-w.
- Released as Tengwar Formal Unicode Version ???? (reserved font name reused with permission.)

14 Sep 2009 (Michał Nowakowski) Tengwar Formal Version 1.2c (bug-fix release)
- Fixed horizontal metrics, that were rubbish, and different between
  "Tengwar Formal" and "Tengwar Formal A". This may result in slightly
  different size than the previous versions.
- Removed GPOS from ttf-mac version - only apple-style kerning is left.
- Truetype versions had different underlines than their postscript/cff
  counterparts.
- One symbol for reverse triple-overdots is encoded as Alt/0173,
  that is - soft hyphen, and often not displayed. Added a duplicate
  at Alt/0128 (Euro Sign).
- Filler glyphs for unused encoding slots in ps1-mac version
  of "Tengwar Formal A" most had duplicated contours.
- Fixed self-intersecting contours of alternate letter for "schwa".
- Updated license to SIL OFL 1.1. For details, see LICENSE file.
- Updated obsolete copyright notices in font files and documentation,
  so that they now all point to the LICENSE file.
- Changed encoding of this and other help files to UTF-8.
- *.ttf and *.otf versions now come with config files for Omega.

13 Feb 2006 (Michał Nowakowski) Version 1.2b (bug-fix release)
- First version to take clear licensing policy. The license choosen is
  Open Font License by SIL. For details, see LICENSE file.
- Vendor updated to "PfEd".
- TFM files were fixed so that the fonts now can be used with TeX,
  thanks to Ignacio Fernández Galván for pointing the bug out!
- Empty code points were filled with references to .notdef, so that
  no rasterizers should report it broken. These references are hinted.
- Removed broken typographic features from Open Type versions.
- Mac version with changed keymapping - see keymapping section.

9 Mar 2005 (Michał Nowakowski) Version 1.2
- Rómenlike tengwar were widened after suggestions of Harri Perälä.
- Tehtar were changed to look better, also when doubled.
- Vowel carriers were given a bit more space.
- Additional font "Tengwar Formal A" with some non-standard and
  alternate glyphs is provided.
- Truetypes were given a tiny prep code to enable dropout control
  when rendering. The font looks a bit better, though still unhinted.

21 Oct 2004 (Michał Nowakowski) Version 1.1
- First version to be made with Pfaedit (now FontForge).
  This made possible publishing the font in multiple formats.
- Broken hinting left after ver. 1.0 framework removed.
- Glyph shapes slightly improved and simplified.
- Tehtar shapes redone.
- Changes in encoding introduced by Pfaedit.

? ? 2004 (Michał Nowakowski) Tengwar Formal Version 1.0
- Initial release of font "Tengwar Formal".

1.4  Acknowledgements (sorted after last name)

N: Måns Björkman
E: at @ mansbjorkman.net
W: http://at.mansbjorkman.net/
D: After looking at examples of Formal Bookhand style in Tengwar Calligraphy,
   it becomes clear that they were main inspiration for creating Tengwar Formal.
   His Tengwar Parmaite font was a also good start point for the design for
   its compatibility with web browsers. Was among first people to evaluate
   Tengwar Formal.

N: Ignacio Ignacio Fernández Galván
E: jellby @ unex.es
W: http://djelibeibi.unex.es
D: Pointed out that it was impossible to use Tengwar Formal 1.2 with TeX.
   Also did a great job explaining usage of Tengwar Formal and similar fonts
   with TeX (see http://djelibeibi.unex.es/tengwar).

N: Michał Nowakowski
E: miszka @ limes.com.pl
W: http://tengwarformal.limes.com.pl
D: Made the font; maintains new versions, documentation and primary download.

N: Harri Perälä
E: harri.perala @ iki.fi
W: http://www.sci.fi/~alboin/
D: Was among first people to evaluate Tengwar Formal - he proposed widening of
   Rómenlike tengwar and better tehtar spacing.

N: Daniel Steven Smith
E: fontmaster.geo @ yahoo.com
W: http://www.geocities.com/fontmaster.geo/
D: Made first widespread tengwar fonts. Keymapping he invented for them became
   a de-facto standard that Tengwar Formal follows. Also he was among first
   people to evaluate Tengwar Formal.

N: Michał Świątkiewicz
E: mimas @ tengwar.art.pl
W: http://www.tengwar.art.pl
D: Was among first people to evaluate and publish Tengwar Formal.

N: George Williams
E: gww @ silcom.com
W: http://fontforge.sourceforge.net/
D: Creator and maintainer of the tool I use to make Tengwar Formal: FontForge.

N: Johan Winge
E: johan.winge @ telia.com
W: http://freetengwar.sourceforge.net/
D: Converted the font to Unicode PUA, and added Graphite tables.
